---
layout: post
title: 'John Muir Trail Journal'
description: 'I hiked about 165 miles on the John Muir Trail from June 27-July 7, 2013.'
---

I hiked about 165 miles on the John Muir Trail (JMT) from June 27-July 7, 2013 with 2 friends, Newton and Patrick (Team JMT). We we met up with friends Adam, Mason and Sandy (Team Charlotte Lake) at Charlotte Lake in Kings Canyon and hiked the last few days with them. This narrative is a fleshed out version of the trail notes I scrawled in my Rite-in-the-Rain journal each night of the trip. The handwriting, at least, is fixed here.

The John Muir Trail is a 211 mile trail from Yosemite Valley to the summit of Mt. Whitney, the tallest point in the lower 48. The JMT is one of the oldest long scenic hiking trails in America, and one of the most beautiful. It precedes the much longer and well known Appalachian Trail (AT) and Pacific Crest Trail (PCT) (which overlaps with most of the JMT). It traverses the crest of some of the highest and most remote mountains in the Sierra Nevada Range. The route of the modern JMT was first traversed in 1908 by a team of 3 people led by Joseph LeConte, in 28 days - a feat difficult to imagine without dynamited trails, Gore Tex and ultralight toothbrushes. Originally called the High Sierra Trail (now the name of a different trail), the trail was renamed when construction began in 1915 a year after the death of famed California naturalist John Muir. The final section of the trail, Forester Pass (the highest point on the PCT), was completed in 1932.

Due to limited vacation time and a fun plan to meet up with friends for the final few days, we ended up abridging the trail to start at Devil's Postpile Monument near Mammoth, CA to maximize our chances of success and avoid ending friendships over grueling 20-mile days.

## Day 0: Google to Tuolumne Meadows (208 miles)
Team JMT met up for dinner at Google Wednesday night, June 27, along with Sandy. After dinner, we finished repackaging our freeze dried meals in the parking lot (Mountain House packages weigh 0.6 ounces more than quart freezer Ziplocs - each!) and decided what food to leave behind with Sandy for our final resupply. We proceeded to test our stove, attempt putting up a tarp using trekking poles on the lawn, and tested our new Sawyer water filter in the Google pond. Of these three unusual tests, only the trekking pole tarp challenged the curiosity of the Google security guard. He was pleased that we were not, in fact planning on camping on the Google lawn.

We left Google campus at exactly 9:59 and arrived at Tuolumne Meadows Backpacker Campground at 2:15am. Given our plans to be at the ranger station when it opened at 8am, we were too lazy to set up our tarp, and suffered through the coldest night of the trip as a result.

## Day 1: Tuolumne Meadows to Devil's Postpile to Lake Virginia (58 miles, 17.5 miles)
We picked up our permits at the Tuolumne Meadows ranger station at 8am as planned, and after narrowly passing the Ranger's quiz on Leave No Trace Ethics, we set out to buy a new jacket for Patrick since his ultralight-no-longer-insulated synthetic sleeping bag didn't seem to be cutting it. We got distracted by Tuolumne Grill, where we each had a delicious breakfast sandwich before Patrick successfully acquired a fancy new Patagonia R1 Jacket. We hit the road a little after 9am, and drove to Mammoth. The road from Mammoth to Devil's Postpile is closed to cars during the day, and the first shuttle was full (they come every half hour), so we didn't end up leaving the trail until 11:37am.

After leaving the crowds at Devil's Postpile in the dust, we passed from the Ansel Adams Wilderness into the even more remote John Muir Wilderness, where we spent the next several days without seeing a single non-through hiker as far as I can remember. The predominant direction of PCT hikers is South to North (so they can get to the Sierras when the snow has melted there in June, but make it through the North Cascades before the snow starts in late September), whereas the JMT hikers prefer North to South (so you end, acclimatized, at the climactic summit of Mt. Whitney, instead of stumbling down into <del>Disney World</del> Yosemite Valley). This meant we met more PCT through hikers.

It is a truth universally acknowledged, we learned, that PCT hikers are crazy. You have to be pretty crazy to want to hike from Mexico to Canada, and if you survive 500 miles of Southern California desert, you come out even crazier than before. The hikers we met on our first day carried silver umbrellas (these are actually quite practical for sun protection, we learned, rather than quirky rain gear), antlers, tennis rackets (we still don't know where to find the nearest tennis court to the PCT) and boomboxes ("I brought John Lennon with me"). Many also wore colorful bandana gaiters around their feet, which we later learned are also practical, since they keep out dirt, pebbles and sticks from getting into your socks and shoes, which can increase blister risk.

About 5 miles in, we met a party of 3 fellow JMT hikers who were convinced that we were at a creek 5 miles further in than we were. We tried our best to convey our suspicion of our actual correct position, but they remained unpersuaded. I think they were in for a long afternoon. We later met a PCT hiker who tried to convince us that Purple Lake, a few miles before our intended destination, Lake Virginia, would be a nicer campsite (false). She claimed that the terrain after Purple Lake was down and then up, making a nice warmup for the next day (also false - the two lakes are separated by a hill). We spent the afternoon leapfrogging Ragin' Cajun and Pins, a young man and woman (possibly a couple - unclear), who met a few weeks earlier on the PCT and decided to hitchhike to Mammoth and do the Sierras North to South before continuing.

Exhausted from sleep deprivation, driving, and hiking, we stumbled into our campsite at Lake Virginia at 8:08pm, just in time for a beautiful sunset and stargazing over my favorite campsite of the whole trip.

## Day 2: Lake Virginia to Bear Creek (19 miles)
After a very long first 36 hours, we let ourselves sleep in until around 8am to start Day 2. While heading up around Lake Virginia, 2 PCT hikers asked me if I was White Lightning (maybe because I was wearing a white shirt and hat). Apparently Ragin' Cajun and Pins wanted to send White Lightning a message that they were up ahead. During our lunch break, we met a father and son who were hiking out to ferry to Vermillion Valley Resort since the father had apparently ruptured a disc in his back - ouch!

Day 2 was the toughest day for me both mentally and physically. We had planned to cover 21 miles and had 2 big climbs - first, a moderate warmup climb of 1500' or so up Silver Pass (10,735'), and second, up the side of Unnamed Hill of Despair (as it became known to us): 2000 feet of relentless, monotonous switchbacks, just forested enough to obscure any view of progress, but not forested enough to shelter us from the afternoon heat. It started drizzling - just enough to be irritating, but not enough to cool us off. Thunder rumbled threateningly in the distance from an ominous dark cloud that appeared to be hanging out one valley over from us the entire afternoon. When we passed by a Northbound PCTer, I asked if the climb ever ended, and she simply responded "Yup", not the "almost there!" I'd been hoping for.

One PCTer we passed warned us to camp at the first campsite before Bear Creek to avoid relentless mosquitoes. Ominous warnings of mosquitoes ahead became a theme of the trip - our head to toe permethrin treatment of our clothing seems to have paid off, since we managed to avoid feeling the mosquito nuisance. We found a beautiful and mosquito free established campsite before Bear Creek, about 2 miles behind our intended campsite at the Lake Italy trail junction, and I certainly appreciated the early respite from what was for me the most grueling day of the trip. We set up our tarp shelter just in time for the first rain of the trip, a mild and brief drizzle. I watched apprehensively as the water trickled slowly from the precipice of the tarp A-frame down toward the ground cloth, and breathed a sigh of relief as the water passed under the ground cloth. The ultralight tarps passed their first test.

## Day 3: Bear Creek to Piute Creek (18 miles)
Woke 5:30, Trail 6:30. Although not nearly as terrifying as the black clouds of Mosquitoes Patrick and I encountered in Emigrant Wilderness a few weeks prior, Bear Creek did in fact have a the worst mosquito presence of the trip. We spent the morning criss-crossing Bear Creek and its tributaries through swampy terrain, including our first wading stream crossings. After one of the crossings, as we were carefully putting back on our shoes and socks, we met a Northbound middle aged women from the PCT who looked at us and said "They'll dry out, you know", before charging straight through the river with full boots and gaiters. End of conversation.

After Bear Creek, we climbed steadily up to Selden Pass through gorgeous Sierra lake basins including Marie Lake, a large lake filled with small islands, and Heart Lake, our first of many shape-named lakes. On the final switchbacks up the pass, we met Matt from Sacramento, who we spent most our breaks with for the rest of the day. Matt was hiking the JMT for the second time after breaking his clavicle playing soccer and subsequently quitting his job. He was hoping that his heavy backpack would help set the clavicle, but had yet to achieve any success with that.

We had lunch at Sally Keyes Lake, a beautiful spot with plentiful camping. While eating, we were passed by 2 older Southbound women and 4 extremely cheerful looking Northbound women who appeared to be maybe just out of high school or early college, the biggest group we saw in the John Muir Wilderness. After lunch, we began the bulk of our descent down 3000' to Muir Trail Ranch for our resupply.  The last 2000' or so we're switchbacks fully exposed to the noon sun on our hottest day.

We spent the hottest part of the day (2-5pm) resting at Muir Trail Ranch, a small family owned compound of cabins and stables accessible by combination of boat and horse (or 21-speed truck brought over Florence Lake via giant floating dock). This is the last resupply point before the most remote section of the JMT. We got to relax and share resupply treats and stories with a number of other through hikers.
 
Here we met our favorite PCT hiker of the trip, Monk. Monk, even more so than the average PCTer, looked like he would have fit in well with the homeless people of the Haight. He carried a 70-pound backpack, which he claimed to be unaware of why it was so much heavier than everyone else's, despite containing 5 musical instruments including a didgeridoo, and a nice Persian rug wrapping his tent that could have been quite useful in my living room. He had gotten rid of the items he wasn't using (first aid kit), and had been lucky enough to find his nice size 13 hiking boots left behind at a hiker resupply box.

We also met Hi/Lo, a middle-aged woman who had hiked the AT in a previous year as preparation. Matt from Orange County, who had the exact same physical description as Matt from Sacramento, decided to hike the JMT on a whim a month previously after being dumped by his girlfriend. He had done lots of research on ultralight and even bought a postal scale, but also ended up with a massive pack - the 70L pack was on sale at REI, and his friend had convinced him that his 30 degree sleeping bag would be insufficient, so he went for a sweltering 0 degree bag instead. He had been spending a few nights at the ranch and had been lucky enough to have a few "PCT hikers" throw away the items he didn't need, but not after accumulating and ungodly number of blisters. Kudos to him for continuing on. We also chatted with the two older women from lunch, one of whom had been a backcountry ranger in Sequoia Kings Canyon National Park until 1992 and personally knew Randy Morgenson, the subject of one of my favorite books, *The Last Season*. She had last seen him alive in LeConte Canyon, where passing through remains an emotional journey for her.

One of the employees at Muir Trail Ranch recounted bitterly that she had been forced into retirement as a backcountry ranger by the Forest Service when she turned 74. It was unclear how long ago that was.

We left the ranch around 5pm and still faced brutal heat going up to Piute Creek. When we reached Piute Creek, the sign telling us we were entering Kings Canyon National Park was redundant with the granite peak of Pavilion Dome towering 3400' over us - evidence of how the National Park Service decided to draw the boundary of National Park vs. National Forest. We spent our first night in Kings Canyon at a beautiful and well-established campsite on the banks of Piute Creek.

## Day 4: Piute Creek to Unnamed Lake #2 (21.5 miles)
Woke 5:30, Trail 6:20. Day 4 was the hardest day of hiking, but possibly the most magnificent as well. The early part of the day meanders easily following the raging San Joaquin River and up through scenic Evolution Valley and McClure Meadow. After leaving Evolution Creek, the trail switchbacks steeply up to Evolution Lake, a gorgeous but mostly shadeless basin, the final possible camping spot before Muir Pass.

Along the way up, we met Jody Coyote, an attractive, tan young women dressed in a well-fit khaki hiking shirt/skirt one piece who laughed maniacally when we mentioned that we'd been waking up early to avoid the heat - apparently 90 and sunny seems like air conditioning when you're coming from 115 in the desert. She also thought we were crazy to be considering camping at Wanda Lake (true) and recommended charging over the pass and camping on the other side, weather permitting. We were feeling great after lunch at Evolution Lake 16 miles in (at least I was) and the weather was holding, so we decided to go for it.

After Evolution Lake we passed through the barren lake basins of Sapphire Lake and Wanda Lake below the imposing cathedral-like walls of Mt. Mendel, Mt. Darwin and Mt. Spencer (the early explorers really had fun with the evolution theme). Along the way we met Daniel, the first PCT hiker without a trail name. The top of the pass (11,955') was cold and windy, and we were grateful to take a snack break inside the John Muir Hut, a small memorial shelter erected in 1931 to protect travelers from lightning. We met 2 more PCTers at the top, one of whom demoed two PCT apps on her iPhone (solar-powered) which told us we had 3.5 miles to go before a campsite above the Middle Fork of the Kings River. Exhausted after the first 19 miles, we hiked down another 2.5 miles or so through sketchy talus and loose gravel through barren lakes and creeks down to a picturesque but wind-exposed campsite above the second unnamed lake after Helen Lake.

## Day 5: Unnamed Lake #2 to Palisade Lake #2
Woke 5:30, Trail 6:20. Only 16 miles and no big passes - our rest day! Much needed after the 21.5 mile bruiser the day before. My feet hated me at this point. We passed steeply down the Middle Fork of the Kings River past many nice campsites, many of which were populated, and not everyone was a through-hiker for the first time since Devil's Postpile. We stopped for a photo-op at a playful Jaws sculpture. At one break, we met Sunnyside Up, the first JMT through hiker with a trail name (dubbed by PCT hikers at Vermillion Valley Resort, aka VVR). We spent the rest of the trip on the same schedule as Sunny, who (along with several other hikers) told us what an awesome place VVR is. It's the last resupply point before Muir Trail Ranch, and is a more full service operation including a first beer free for through hikers, free camping, and delicious food. Many PCTers stay there for a few days to rest, recuperate and party. Next time I'm passing through, I'll be sure to stop by -  something I'd try to change if I were to rewrite our itinerary.

We took a long afternoon siesta along the banks of Palisade Creek including much needed ice baths in the freezing creek for our sore feet and a leisurely nap. After lunch, we met a bitter Northbound hiker who thought we were crazy to think there was campable terrain at Palisade Lakes above. A minute or two later he said "Palisade Lakes? Oh yeah, plenty of nice camping there" as if the conversation earlier had never happened. By this point in the trip we had learned to not be too fazed by erratic, delirious behavior from PCT hikers.

After 2,000 feet of formidable switchbacks to Palisade Lakes made easier by playing challenging word games, we found a beautiful campsite up high above Palisade Lake #2. We made it to camp around 5pm and had time to wash our clothes, ice bath and relax in a roaring creek between small waterfalls before dinner.

We set up our shelter in a constrained area between rocks and trees that proved to be difficult to pull fully taut. The wind was particularly brutal that night, and kept Newton and me up for a lot of the night. At one point we had a very confused, mostly asleep conversation where I (on the outside edge of the tarp) was convinced that one of the pieces of the shelter must have collapsed.

## Day 6: Palisade Lake #2 to Sawmill Creek Trail Junction (17 miles)
Woke 5:45. Trail 7:00. We began the day with a moderate ascent up Mather Pass, about 1500' above Palisade Lakes. Most of the hard climbing to Mather Pass happened the previous afternoon, but we still had about 1000' of switchbacks up to the pass. Along the way we met a Northbound Scandinavian through-hiker who told us he'd camped on top of Mather Pass. We're not really sure how that's possible, but good for him for finding a spot big enough for a bivvy sack!

After the initial switchbacks down from Mather Pass, we entered barren alpine country and descended gradually to Bench Lake Ranger station and Lake Marjorie, where we ate lunch before climbing back up to Pinchot Pass on our only two-pass day. We arrived at our campsite at the Sawmill Creek Trail Junction at 3pm. Patrick and Newton assembled an ultralight chess board using a RidgeRest Z-lite and bits and pieces of the forest to pass the afternoon.

## Day 7: Sawmill Creek Trail Junction to Charlotte Lake (16 miles)
Woke 4:30. Trail 5:30. We wanted to get an early start to make it to Charlotte Lake for a relaxing afternoon at one of our favorite camping spots from our trip last year. We arrived at Dollar Lake, the first lake in the gorgeous Rae Lakes region, around 10am and had a long break. We stopped again for lunch a little later at the end of Rae Lakes, before ascending Glen Pass. We spent the day speculating about all of the possible scenarios and whereabouts of our friends' trip from San Francisco to Onion Valley, in through Kearsarge Pass and down to meet us at Charlotte Lake.

At 3pm, we arrived at Charlotte Lake, a worthwhile side trip a little over a mile off the JMT. We found a suitable group camp site along the shore and left our friends a note on the Ranger Station trail sign before heading into the lake for a refreshing and much needed swim.

After setting up camp, we began to get a bit restless waiting for our friends and wondering when they might show up. We had a betting pool with both primary and secondary guesses for their arrival time, ranging from 3pm to 10:30pm. By 6pm, Patrick expressed his concern that all hope was lost. At 6:15, I started to hear voices across the lake, which quickly became closer and I confirmed that there were 3 voices, 2 male and 1 female! We were very excited to see our friends, who not only remembered to bring all of our resupply food but also brought Ghirardelli's dark chocolate and fresh apples! We'll forgive them for forgetting the giant bag of imaginary Clementines we'd been fantasizing about. I was pretty excited about the 2 pound block of extra sharp cheddar cheese I had entrusted to Mason.

When they recounted the story of their last 24 hours, it was even crazier than any of our fantasy scenarios! Basically, Sandy had a last minute work trip to LA and ended up hitchhiking from LA to Mammoth with a pro snowboarder after her flight ejected the last 4 people to buy tickets so the plane would weigh less in a thunder storm. Or something like that. The important part is that all 3 of the made it safely to Charlotte Lake, with all their gear, and all our food, before sunset!

## Day 8: Charlotte Lake to Tyndall Creek (16 miles)
Woke 5:30, Trail 7:30. The morning hike started with an uneventful slog up from Charlotte Lake toward Forester Pass. Dark storm clouds began rolling in throughout the morning, which wasn't too unusual until we reached tree line around 12:30pm. At this point, the sky erupted into a massive 4th of July hail storm that soaked us while we frantically tried to set up our tent and hunker down.